# Quick Sort

Quick sort follows Divide and Conquer algorithm. It is dividing elements in to smaller parts based on some condition and performing the sort operations on those divided smaller parts.

## Pseudocode

        ALGORITHM QuickSort(arr, left, right)
            if left < right
                // Partition the array by setting the position of the pivot value
                DEFINE position <-- Partition(arr, left, right)
                // Sort the left
                QuickSort(arr, left, position - 1)
                // Sort the right
                QuickSort(arr, position + 1, right)

        ALGORITHM Partition(arr, left, right)
            // set a pivot value as a point of reference
            DEFINE pivot <-- arr[right]
            // create a variable to track the largest index of numbers lower than the defined pivot
            DEFINE low <-- left - 1
            for i <- left to right do
                if arr[i] <= pivot
                    low++
                    Swap(arr, i, low)

            // place the value of the pivot location in the middle.
            // all numbers smaller than the pivot are on the left, larger on the right.
            Swap(arr, right, low + 1)
            // return the pivot index point
            return low + 1

        ALGORITHM Swap(arr, i, low)
            DEFINE temp;
            temp <-- arr[i]
            arr[i] <-- arr[low]
            arr[low] <-- temp

## Trace

Sample Array: `[8,4,23,42,16,15]`

---

**Step 1**: Call quickSort function with `([8,4,23,42,16,15], 0, 5)` as an arguments, then it will check if the left less than right will declare a new variable which is position and will call partition function with `([8,4,23,42,16,15], 0, 5)` as an arguments.

**Step 2**: Inside partition function first thing a pivot will be declared and its value will be arr[5] = 15, so the pivot will be the last value in the array.

**Step 3**: Determine pointer with -1 value.

**Step 4**: Looping using for loop from left to right and in each iteration check if arr[i] less than the pivot increase the pointer value by 1 and call swap function with `(arr, i, the pointer(low))` as an arguments.

**Step 5**: In swap function simply it will make a trade for two values in the array which the ary arr[i] and arr[low]; by creating a temp variable to hold arr[i] value.

**Step 6**: Now after the for loop ends swap function will be called with `(arr, right, low + 1)`, after that partition function will returns `low + 1`.

**Final Steps**: After going back to quickSort function the quickSort function will be called again with `(arr, left, position -1)`, then will repeat all of the previous steps. after this call ends the quickSort function will be called again with `(arr, right, position +1)` arguments. After that the sample array will be sorted successfully 🥳.

---

## Efficency

- Time: O(n^2)

- Space: O(i)

---

## Links

[Working Code](../code-challenges/quick-sort/index.js)

[Testing Unit](../code-challenges/__test__/quickSort.test.js)
